Chances are you want
your mainframe on a
network of some sort.
Maybe not the Internet,
but back in course one,
we talked about all of the PCIe
adapters that a system can have,
and chances are,
some of those are
OSA or Open Systems Adaptors.
These are the network cards for
the mainframe and they
come in a wide variety of
flavors suited for copper and
fiber links from
gigabit to 10 gigabit,
and even up to 25 gigabit speeds.
On z/OS, TCPIP is handled
by the TCPIP started task.
So it starts up and
stays up generally
until the cyst Prague or
another operator takes it down.
Generally, we refer to
this started TCPIP task
as a stack, the TCPIP stack.
Before we get into
the TCPIP stack,
I want to take just a
minute to dive into
the concepts of IP
addresses and sockets.
If you're already familiar with
this from another platform,
the next minute and a half
probably won't be
all that new to you.
So you can go and
check your email or
scroll around a little
bit if you don't
want to hear it, I
won't be offended.
Typically, a system on a network
has an IP address or two.
You'll even see some z/OS
systems that have five,
six, even more IP addresses.
An IP address is
a 32 bit address represented
in dotted decimal like this.
So it looks like four
numbers each between
zero and 255 with
dots in between them.
That address is a lot like
an address for a house.
With that address, we
can find the server on
the network or even the Internet
that we want to talk to.
I'll also mention that
the 32 bit address
is what's called an IPv4 address.
There's a constant
concern that will run
out of IPv4 addresses.
So there's also IPv6.
This is much longer,
it's a 128 bits and
it looks like this.
It's longer, it uses
Colin's data dots,
and it's represented
in hexadecimal.
So there's a couple
letters in there to.
Many more possible combinations.
You won't see an IPv6
address everywhere just yet,
people are still
trying to ride out
IPv4 for as long as possible,
but in case you see an
IP address that looks
different than what you are
expecting, that might be it.
Anyway, the IP address,
be it IPv4 or v6 gets
us to the server,
but a server can run
on multiple programs.
How do we get to the
exact program we want?
Those programs operate on
what's called a socket.
So you've got the IP address,
colon, and then
the socket number.
All that goes over the network.
Once a socket connection
is established,
the program can start
issuing reads and writes
on that socket to
get or put data.
Then when it's done we close
that socket and life goes on.
So we have this TCPIP profile,
and within it we find a number of
statements that build our
configuration step-by-step.
For example, you'll probably find
devise link and home statements.
The device statement states
which network devices
we want to use,
the subsequent links statements
say how we want to use them,
and then below that in
the home statements,
that's where we set
the IP addresses
and net masking and
all that stuff.
Now, this is a fairly
simple setup right here.
There's three devices,
three links statements,
and three IP addresses.
It can get quite a
bit more complicated
where it's not always a
one-to-one-to-one mapping.
I just don't really
think that we're making
this complex for no reason.
Now, let's talk about
that VIPALNK1 entry.
That sounds interesting,
and yeah, actually it is.
So typically an IP address
should only be defined in
one place because
there needs to be
no confusion about where
that IP address is.
Typically, if we tell
someone that a server
is at a specific IP address,
and that server goes down or
there's a network problem,
people can no longer
reach that server.
That's when they start
calling you and getting
angry and nobody wants that.
What a VIPA does,
is it defines an IP address
to the system virtually.
Take a look at this diagram.
We've got two LPARs
each defined with
the same VIPA in addition to
their own unique IP addresses
for each network link.
This is a fairly standard
high availability setup
because if one LPAR
is the primary,
and also device one goes
down for whatever reason,
that VIPA is still reachable
through the second pathway at
the same IP address or
even if the whole
LPAR will go down,
the backup takes over.
It's got two links as well.
So you can actually lose
three links and an LPAR and
the service is still available at
that VIPA address. Pretty cool.
For that reason,
you'll often find
critical services associated with
a VIPA instead of an
IP address that's
hard coded to a single
link or device.
The virtualization
and architecture of z
allows for some pretty
crafty ways of implementing
highly available and highly
performance solutions
that you just won't
find anywhere else,
especially in distributed
environments.